Limp, the body of Gorrister hung from the pink palette; unsupported—hanging
high above us in the computer chamber; and it did not shiver in the chill, oily breeze
that blew eternally through the main cavern. The body hung head down, attached to
the underside of the palette by the sole of its right foot. It had been drained of blood
through a precise incision made from ear to ear under the lantern jaw. There was no
blood on the reflective surface of the metal floor.
When Gorrister joined our group and looked up at himself, it was already too
late for us to realize that, once again, AM had duped us, had had its fun; it had been a
diversion on the part of the machine. Three of us had vomited, turning away from
one another in a reflex as ancient as the nausea that had produced it.
Gorrister went white. It was almost as though he had seen a voodoo icon, and
was afraid of the future. "Oh, God," he mumbled, and walked away. The three of us
followed him after a time, and found him sitting with his back to one of the smaller
chittering banks, his head in his hands. Ellen knelt down beside him and stroked his
hair. He didn't move, but his voice came out of his covered face quite clearly. "Why
doesn't it just do us in and get it over with? Christ, I don't know how much longer I
can go on like this."
It was our one hundred and ninth year in the computer.
He was speaking for all of us.
Nimdok (which was the name the machine had forced him to use, because AM
amused itself with strange sounds) was hallucinating that there were canned goods
in the ice caverns. Gorrister and I were very dubious. "It's another shuck," I told
them. "Like the goddam frozen elephant AM sold us. Benny almost went out of his
mind over that one. We'll hike all that way and it'll be putrified or some damn thing.
I say forget it. Stay here, it'll have to come up with something pretty soon or we'll
die."
Benny shrugged. Three days it had been since we'd last eaten. Worms. Thick,
ropey.
Nimdok was no more certain. He knew there was the chance, but he was getting
thin. It couldn't be any worse there, than here. Colder, but that didn't matter much.
Hot, cold, hail, lava, boils or locusts—it never mattered: the machine masturbated
and we had to take it or die.
Ellen decided us. "I've got to have something, Ted. Maybe there'll be some
Bartlett pears or peaches. Please, Ted, let's try it."
I gave in easily. What the hell. Mattered not at all. Ellen was grateful, though.
She took me twice out of turn. Even that had ceased to matter. And she never came,
so why bother? But the machine giggled every time we did it. Loud, up there, back
there, all around us, he snickered. It snickered. Most of the time I thought of AM as
it, without a soul; but the rest of the time I thought of it as him, in the masculine ...
the paternal ... the patriarchal ... for he is a jealous people. Him. It. God as Daddy the
Deranged.
We left on a Thursday. The machine always kept us up­to­date on the date. The
passage of time was important; not to us, sure as hell, but to him ... it ... AM.
Thursday. Thanks.
Nimdok and Gorrister carried Ellen for a while, their hands locked to their own
and each other's wrists, a seat. Benny and I walked before and after, just to make
sure that, if anything happened, it would catch one of us and at least Ellen would be
safe. Fat chance, safe. Didn't matter.
It was only a hundred miles or so to the ice caverns, and the second day, when
we were lying out under the blistering sun­thing he had materialized, he sent down
some manna. Tasted like boiled boar urine. We ate it.
On the third day we passed through a valley of obsolescence, filled with rusting
carcasses of ancient computer banks. AM had been as ruthless with its own life as
with ours. It was a mark of his personality: it strove for perfection. Whether it was a
matter of killing off unproductive elements in his own world­filling bulk, or
perfecting methods for torturing us, AM was as thorough as those who had invented
him—now long since gone to dust—could ever have hoped.
There was light filtering down from above, and we realized we must be very near
the surface. But we didn't try to crawl up to see. There was virtually nothing out
there; had been nothing that could be considered anything for over a hundred years.
Only the blasted skin of what had once been the home of billions. Now there were
only five of us, down here inside, alone with AM.
I heard Ellen saying frantically, "No, Benny! Don't, come on, Benny, don't
please!"
And then I realized I had been hearing Benny murmuring, under his breath, for
several minutes. He was saying, "I'm gonna get out, I'm gonna get out ..." over and
over. His monkey­like face was crumbled up in an expression of beatific delight and
sadness, all at the same time. The radiation scars AM had given him during the
"festival" were drawn down into a mass of pink­white puckerings, and his features
seemed to work independently of one another. Perhaps Benny was the luckiest of the
five of us: he had gone stark, staring mad many years before.
But even though we could call AM any damned thing we liked, could think the
foulest thoughts of fused memory banks and corroded base plates, of burnt out
circuits and shattered control bubbles, the machine would not tolerate our trying to
escape. Benny leaped away from me as I made a grab for him. He scrambled up the
face of a smaller memory cube, tilted on its side and filled with rotted components.
He squatted there for a moment, looking like the chimpanzee AM had intended him
to resemble.
Then he leaped high, caught a trailing beam of pitted and corroded metal, and
went up it, hand­over­hand like an animal, till he was on a girdered ledge, twenty
feet above us.
"Oh, Ted, Nimdok, please, help him, get him down before—" She cut off. Tears
began to stand in her eyes. She moved her hands aimlessly.
It was too late. None of us wanted to be near him when whatever was going to
happen, happened. And besides, we all saw through her concern. When AM had
altered Benny, during the machine's utterly irrational, hysterical phase, it was not
merely Benny's face the computer had made like a giant ape's. He was big in the
privates; she loved that! She serviced us, as a matter of course, but she loved it from
him. Oh Ellen, pedestal Ellen, pristine­pure Ellen; oh Ellen the clean! Scum filth.
Gorrister slapped her. She slumped down, staring up at poor loonie Benny, and
she cried. It was her big defense, crying. We had gotten used to it seventy­five years
earlier. Gorrister kicked her in the side.
Then the sound began. It was light, that sound. Half sound and half light,
something that began to glow from Benny's eyes, and pulse with growing loudness,
dim sonorities that grew more gigantic and brighter as the light/sound increased in
tempo. It must have been painful, and the pain must have been increasing with the
boldness of the light, the rising volume of the sound, for Benny began to mewl like a
wounded animal. At first softly, when the light was dim and the sound was muted,
then louder as his shoulders hunched together: his back humped, as though he was
trying to get away from it. His hands folded across his chest like a chipmunk's. His
head tilted to the side. The sad little monkey­face pinched in anguish. Then he began
to howl, as the sound coming from his eyes grew louder. Louder and louder. I
slapped the sides of my head with my hands, but I couldn't shut it out, it cut through
easily. The pain shivered through my flesh like tinfoil on a tooth.
And Benny was suddenly pulled erect. On the girder he stood up, jerked to his
feet like a puppet. The light was now pulsing out of his eyes in two great round
beams. The sound crawled up and up some incomprehensible scale, and then he fell
forward, straight down, and hit the plate­steel floor with a crash. He lay there jerking
spastically as the light flowed around and around him and the sound spiraled up out
of normal range.
Then the light beat its way back inside his head, the sound spiraled down, and
he was left lying there, crying piteously.
His eyes were two soft, moist pools of pus­like jelly. AM had blinded him.
Gorrister and Nimdok and myself ... we turned away. But not before we caught the
look of relief on Ellen's warm, concerned face.
Sea­green light suffused the cavern where we made camp. AM provided punk
and we burned it, sitting huddled around the wan and pathetic fire, telling stories to
keep Benny from crying in his permanent night.
"What does AM mean?"
Gorrister answered him. We had done this sequence a thousand times before,
but it was Benny's favorite story. "At first it meant Allied Mastercomputer, and then
it meant Adaptive Manipulator, and later on it developed sentience and linked itself
up and they called it an Aggressive Menace, but by then it was too late, and finally it
called itself AM, emerging intelligence, and what it meant was I am ... cogito ergo
sum ... I think, therefore I am."
Benny drooled a little, and snickered.
"There was the Chinese AM and the Russian AM and the Yankee AM and—" He
stopped. Benny was beating on the floorplates with a large, hard fist. He was not
happy. Gorrister had not started at the beginning.
Gorrister began again. "The Cold War started and became World War Three and
just kept going. It became a big war, a very complex war, so they needed the
computers to handle it. They sank the first shafts and began building AM. There was
the Chinese AM and the Russian AM and the Yankee AM and everything was fine
until they had honeycombed the entire planet, adding on this element and that
element. But one day AM woke up and knew who he was, and he linked himself, and
he began feeding all the killing data, until everyone was dead, except for the five of
us, and AM brought us down here."
Benny was smiling sadly. He was also drooling again. Ellen wiped the spittle
from the corner of his mouth with the hem of her skirt. Gorrister always tried to tell
it a little more succinctly each time, but beyond the bare facts there was nothing to
say. None of us knew why AM had saved five people, or why our specific five, or why
he spent all his time tormenting us, or even why he had made us virtually immortal
...
In the darkness, one of the computer banks began humming. The tone was
picked up half a mile away down the cavern by another bank. Then one by one, each
of the elements began to tune itself, and there was a faint chittering as thought raced
through the machine.
The sound grew, and the lights ran across the faces of the consoles like heat
lightening. The sound spiraled up till it sounded like a million metallic insects, angry,
menacing.
"What is it?" Ellen cried. There was terror in her voice. She hadn't become
accustomed to it, even now.
"It's going to be bad this time," Nimdok said.
"He's going to speak," Gorrister said. "I know it."
"Let's get the hell out of here!" I said suddenly, getting to my feet.
"No, Ted, sit down ... what if he's got pits out there, or something else, we can't
see, it's too dark." Gorrister said it with resignation.
Then we heard ... I don't know ...
Something moving toward us in the darkness. Huge, shambling, hairy, moist, it
came toward us. We couldn't even see it, but there was the ponderous impression of
bulk, heaving itself toward us. Great weight was coming at us, out of the darkness,
and it was more a sense of pressure, of air forcing itself into a limited space,
expanding the invisible walls of a sphere. Benny began to whimper. Nimdok's lower
lip trembled and he bit it hard, trying to stop it. Ellen slid across the metal floor to
Gorrister and huddled into him. There was the smell of matted, wet fur in the cavern.
There was the smell of charred wood. There was the smell of dusty velvet. There was the smell of rotting orchids. There was the smell of sour milk. There was the smell of
sulphur, of rancid butter, of oil slick, of grease, of chalk dust, of human scalps.
AM was keying us. He was tickling us. There was the smell of—
I heard myself shriek, and the hinges of my jaws ached. I scuttled across the
floor, across the cold metal with its endless lines of rivets, on my hands and knees,
the smell gagging me, filling my head with a thunderous pain that sent me away in
horror. I fled like a cockroach, across the floor and out into the darkness, that
something moving inexorably after me. The others were still back there, gathered
around the firelight, laughing ... their hysterical choir of insane giggles rising up into
the darkness like thick, many­colored wood smoke. I went away, quickly, and hid.
How many hours it may have been, how many days or even years, they never
told me. Ellen chided me for "sulking," and Nimdok tried to persuade me it had only
been a nervous reflex on their part—the laughing.
But I knew it wasn't the relief a soldier feels when the bullet hits the man next to
him. I knew it wasn't a reflex. They hated me. They were surely against me, and AM
could even sense this hatred, and made it worse for me because of the depth of their
hatred. We had been kept alive, rejuvenated, made to remain constantly at the age
we had been when AM had brought us below, and they hated me because I was the
youngest, and the one AM had affected least of all.
I knew. God, how I knew. The bastards, and that dirty bitch Ellen. Benny had
been a brilliant theorist, a college professor; now he was little more than a semihuman, semi­simian. He had been handsome, the machine had ruined that. He had
been lucid, the machine had driven him mad. He had been gay, and the machine had
given him an organ fit for a horse. AM had done a job on Benny. Gorrister had been a
worrier. He was a connie, a conscientious objector; he was a peace marcher; he was a
planner, a doer, a looker­ahead. AM had turned him into a shoulder­shrugger, had
made him a little dead in his concern. AM had robbed him. Nimdok went off in the
darkness by himself for long times. I don't know what it was he did out there, AM
never let us know. But whatever it was, Nimdok always came back white, drained of
blood, shaken, shaking. AM had hit him hard in a special way, even if we didn't know
quite how. And Ellen. That douche bag! AM had left her alone, had made her more of
a slut than she had ever been. All her talk of sweetness and light, all her memories of
true love, all the lies she wanted us to believe: that she had been a virgin only twice
removed before AM grabbed her and brought her down here with us. No, AM had
given her pleasure, even if she said it wasn't nice to do.
I was the only one still sane and whole. Really!
AM had not tampered with my mind. Not at all.
I only had to suffer what he visited down on us. All the delusions, all the
nightmares, the torments. But those scum, all four of them, they were lined and
arrayed against me. If I hadn't had to stand them off all the time, be on my guard
against them all the time, I might have found it easier to combat AM.
At which point it passed, and I began crying.
Oh, Jesus sweet Jesus, if there ever was a Jesus and if there is a God, please
please please let us out of here, or kill us. Because at that moment I think I realized
completely, so that I was able to verbalize it: AM was intent on keeping us in his belly
forever, twisting and torturing us forever. The machine hated us as no sentient
creature had ever hated before. And we were helpless. It also became hideously clear:
If there was a sweet Jesus and if there was a God, the God was AM.
The hurricane hit us with the force of a glacier thundering into the sea. It was a
palpable presence. Winds that tore at us, flinging us back the way we had come,
down the twisting, computer­lined corridors of the darkway. Ellen screamed as she
was lifted and hurled face­forward into a screaming shoal of machines, their
individual voices strident as bats in flight. She could not even fall. The howling wind
kept her aloft, buffeted her, bounced her, tossed her back and back and down and
away from us, out of sight suddenly as she was swirled around a bend in the
darkway. Her face had been bloody, her eyes closed.
None of us could get to her. We clung tenaciously to whatever outcropping we
had reached: Benny wedged in between two great crackle­finish cabinets, Nimdok
with fingers claw­formed over a railing circling a catwalk forty feet above us,
Gorrister plastered upside­down against a wall niche formed by two great machines
with glass­faced dials that swung back and forth between red and yellow lines whose
meanings we could not even fathom.
Sliding across the deckplates, the tips of my fingers had been ripped away. I was
trembling, shuddering, rocking as the wind beat at me, whipped at me, screamed
down out of nowhere at me and pulled me free from one sliver­thin opening in the
plates to the next. My mind was a roiling tinkling chittering softness of brain parts
that expanded and contracted in quivering frenzy.
The wind was the scream of a great mad bird, as it flapped its immense wings.
And then we were all lifted and hurled away from there, down back the way we
had come, around a bend, into a darkway we had never explored, over terrain that
was ruined and filled with broken glass and rotting cables and rusted metal and far
away, farther than any of us had ever been ...
Trailing along miles behind Ellen, I could see her every now and then, crashing
into metal walls and surging on, with all of us screaming in the freezing, thunderous
hurricane wind that would never end and then suddenly it stopped and we fell. We
had been in flight for an endless time. I thought it might have been weeks. We fell,
and hit, and I went through red and gray and black and heard myself moaning. Not
dead.
AM went into my mind. He walked smoothly here and there, and looked with
interest at all the pock marks he had created in one hundred and nine years. He
looked at the cross­routed and reconnected synapses and all the tissue damage his
gift of immortality had included. He smiled softly at the pit that dropped into the
center of my brain and the faint, moth­soft murmurings of the things far down there
that gibbered without meaning, without pause. AM said, very politely, in a pillar of
stainless steel bearing bright neon lettering
“HATE. LET ME TELL YOU HOW MUCH I'VE COME TO HATE YOU SINCE I BEGAN TO LIVE. THERE ARE 387.44 MILLION MILES OF PRINTED CIRCUITS IN WAFER THIN LAYERS THAT FILL MY COMPLEX. IF THE WORD HATE WAS ENGRAVED ON EACH NANOANGSTROM OF THOSE HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS OF MILES IT WOULD NOT EQUAL ONE ONE-BILLIONTH OF THE HATE I FEEL FOR HUMANS AT THIS MICRO-INSTANT FOR YOU. HATE. HATE.”